Tales from Fleet security: mailing list scams with Google Groups (#6953)
fleetdm/fleet: articles/tales-from-fleet-security-google-groups-scams.md

From a UI point of view, the recipient can easily mistake the message for a legitimate one, as the domain name is either replaced with the legitimate domain or gets the mention "via legitimatedomain.com" added.

![With via added](../website/assets/images/articles/tales-from-fleet-security-google-groups-scams-1-1156x298@2x.png)

Our mistake was assuming the message went through the same filters as those used for regular email. In reality, Google Groups uses different technologies for filtering spam, and the more advanced Gmail features do not apply.

### Email processing

```mermaid
graph TD;
id1[Attacker]
id2[Malicious email]
id3[Group address]
id4[Internal recipients]
id5[External recipients]
id6[Gmail antispam/phishing]
id7[Google group weaker antispam/phishing]
id8[Email displayed with group email address and employee name]

id1--Creates real email account with employee name-->id2
id2--SPF and DKIM succeed-->id7
id7--Email passes-->id3
id3--Forwarded-->id6
id6--Passes as it is now an internal email-->id4
id6--Forwarded externally with new signature-->id5
id5-->id8
id4-->id8

```

> We contacted Google to ask why this message made it through filters. They confirmed that the filters are different on Groups vs Gmail (emphasis ours):

Reviewer: @Desmi-Dizney, "Groups" is the product name.

> > Regarding your case, I understand that you see in the header this emails passing the authentication methods when it goes to group, in the message headers for emails sent to a group, you will see two authentication checks, the one done to your Group, because it comes from your group to your domain, that always passes as it is expected due to your domain is fully authenticated with SPF, DKIM and DMARC policy, and there is another authentication check for the original sender below on the message header, still the authentication methods are always checked by the the Groups spam moderation filter, as well by the users spam filter, which are **separate spam filters**. 

Reviewer: @Desmi-Dizney, I think we should leave this blockquote and the one below unedited. I believe they are direct quotes from @GuillaumeRoss 's conversation with Google support.

@GuillaumeRoss, what do you think about adding these as screenshots of the actual email conversation for authenticity? I can edit out any sensitive info if necessary.

> > Regarding your case, I understand that you see in the header this emails passing the authentication methods when it goes to group, in the message headers for emails sent to a group, you will see two authentication checks, the one done to your Group, because it comes from your group to your domain, that always passes as it is expected due to your domain is fully authenticated with SPF, DKIM and DMARC policy, and there is another authentication check for the original sender below on the message header, still the authentication methods are always checked by the the Groups spam moderation filter, as well by the users spam filter, which are **separate spam filters**. 

Author: Those were the exact quotes indeed. I can add screenshots but that's not very legible compared to text. Maybe the formatting on our website is not ideal for quotes, so I'll add something to make it more obvious it is a quote.

In this case, the attacker didn't spoof our domain, so enabling this feature did not help. 

Two weeks after this happened, we saw a [Tweet](https://twitter.com/Centurion/status/1549780307544379392?s=20&t=aehcFzyPfH_56fCLGpRddA) by Chris Long at Material security, who had written a [blog post](https://material.security/blog/identify-google-groups-vulnerable-to-spam-and-spoofing) on this topic.

Chris and Material tested and realized that Google Groups delivered five out of six types of spoofed emails while Gmail blocked all six. They also figured out why the original email was replaced with the mailing list email, as Google Groups replaced it when the DMARC policy would cause the delivery to fail. 

We performed the same tests at Fleet, using [emailspooftest](https://emailspooftest.com/). Our results were slightly different, but we successfully sent two very suspicious email messages to a mailing list. When we sent the same type of email to an individual, Gmail blocked each attempt.

## How we noticed and stopped the attack

> At Fleet, we have many excellent employees and contractors with an excellent eye for detail. We share information about potential scams, including phishing messages, over Slack so the entire company is always aware of the suspicious stuff we see.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At Fleet, we have excellent employees and contractors with amazing eyes for detail. We share information about potential scams, including phishing messages, over Slack, so the entire company is always aware of the suspicious stuff we see.
```
